[SOUND] Hi and welcome back.
In the previous videos we discussed
the concept of validation and overfitting.
And discussed how to chose
validation strategy based
on the properties of data we have.
And finally we learned to identify
data split made by organizers.
After all this work being done,
we honestly expect that the relation will,
in a way, substitute a leaderboard for us.
That is the score we see on
the validation will be the same for
the private leaderboard.
Or at least, if we improve our model and
validation, there will be improvements
on the private leaderboard.
And this is usually true, but
sometimes we encounter some problems here.
In most cases these problems can
be divided into two big groups.
In the first group are the problems
we encounter during local validation.
Usually they are caused by
inconsistency of the data,
a widespread example is getting different
optimal parameters for different faults.
In this case we need to make
more thorough validation.
The problems from the second group,
often reveal themselves only when we
send our submissions to the platform.
And observe that scores on the validation
and on the leaderboard don't match.
In this case, the problem usually occurs
because we can't mimic the exact
train test split on our validation.
These are tough problems, and we
definitely want to be able to handle them.
So before we start,
let me provide an overview of this video.
For both validation and submission
stages we will discuss main problems,
their causes, how to handle them.
And then, we'll talk a bit about when
we can expect a leaderboard shuffle.
Let's start with discussion
of validation stage problems.
Usually, they attract our
attention during validation.
Generally, the main problem is
a significant difference in scores and
optimal parameters for
different train validation splits.
Let's start with an example.
So we can easily explain this problem.
Consider that we need to predict
sales in a shop in February.
Say we have target values for
the last year, and, usually,
we will take last month in the validation.
This means January, but clearly January
has much more holidays than February.
And people tend to buy more, which causes
target values to be higher overall.
And that mean squared error
of our predictions for
January will be greater than for February.
Does this mean that the module
will perform worse for February?
Probably not,
at least not in terms of overfitting.
As we can see, sometimes this kind
of model behavior can be expected.
But what if there is no clear reason
why scores differ for different folds?
Let identify several common reasons for
this and see what we can do about it.
The first hypotheses we should consider
and that we have too little data.
For example, consider a case when we have
a lot of patterns and trends in the data.
But we do not have enough samples
to generalize these patterns well.
In that case, a model will utilize
only some general patterns.
And for each train validation split,
these patterns will partially differ.
This indeed, will lead to
a difference in scores of the model.
Furthermore, validation samples
will be different each time only
increasing the dispersion of scores for
different folds.
The second type of this,
is data is too diverse and inconsistent.
For example, if you have very similar
samples with different target variance,
a model can confuse them.
Consider two cases, first,
if one of such examples is in the train
while another is in the validation.
We can get a pretty high error for
the second sample.
And the second case,
if both samples are in validation,
we will get smaller errors for them.
Or let's remember another
example of diverse data
we have already discussed a bit earlier.
I'm talking about the example of
predicting sales for January and February.
Here we have the nature or the reason for
the differences in scores.
As a quick note, notice that in this
example, we can reduce this diversity
a bit if we will validate on
the February from the previous year.
So the main reasons for a difference in
scores and optimal model parameters for
different folds are, first,
having too little data, and
second, having too diverse and
inconsistent data.
Now let's outline our actions here.
If we are facing this kind of problem,
it can be useful to make
more thorough validation.
You can increase K in KFold,
but usually 5 folds are enough.
Make KFold validation several times
with different random splits.
And average scores to get a more
stable estimate of model's quality.
The same way we can choose
the best parameters for
the model if there is a chance to overfit.
It is useful to use one set of KFold
splits to select parameters and
another set of KFold splits
to check model's quality.
Examples of competitions which
required extensive validation include
the Liberty Mutual Group Property
Inspection Prediction competition and
the Santander Customer Satisfaction
competition.
In both of them, scores of the competitors
were very close to each other.
And thus participants tried to
squeeze more from the data.
But do not overfit, so
the thorough validation was crucial.
Now, having discussed
validation stage problems,
let's move on to
submission stage problems.
Sometimes you can diagnose these problems
in the process of doing careful.
But still,
often you encounter these type of problems
only when you submit your
solution to the platform.
But then again,
is your friend when it comes down
to finding the root of the problem.
Generally speaking,
there are two cases of these issues.
In the first case, leaderboard
score is consistently higher or
lower than validation score.
In the second, leaderboard score is not
correlated with validation score at all.
So in the worst case, we can improve
our score on the validation.
While, on the contrary,
score on the leaderboard will decrease.
As you can imagine,
these problems can be much more trouble.
Now remember that the main rule
of making a reliable validation,
is to mimic a train tests
pre made by organizers.
I won't lie to you,
it can be quite hard to identify and
mimic the exact train tests here.
Because of that, I highly you to
start submitting your solutions
right after you enter the competition.
It's good to start exploring other
possible roots of this problem.
Let's first sort out causes we could
observe during validation stage.
Recall, we already have different
model scores on different
folds during validation.
Here it is useful to see a leaderboard
as another validation fold.
Then, if we already have
different scores in KFold,
getting a not very similar result on
the leaderboard is not suprising.
More we can calculate mean and standard
deviation of the validation scores and
estimate if the leaderboard
score is expected.
But if this is not the case,
then something is definitely wrong.
There could be two more reasons for
this problem.
The first reason, we have too
little data in public leaderboard,
which is pretty self explanatory.
Just trust your validation,
and everything will be fine.
And the second train and test data
are from different distributions.
Let me explain what I mean when I
talk about different distributions.
Consider a regression test of
predicting people's height
by their photos on Instagram.
The blue line represents
the distribution of heights for man,
while the red line represents
the distribution of heights for women.
As you can see,
these distributions are different.
Now let's consider that the train
data consists only of women,
while the test data consists only of men.
Then all model predictions will be
around the average height for women.
And the distribution of these predictions
will be very similar to that for
the train data.
No wonder that our model will have
a terrible score on the test data.
Now, because our course is a practical
one, let's take a moment and
think what you can do if you
encounter these in a competition.
Okay, let's start with a general
approach to such problems.
At the broadest level,
we need to find a way to tackle different
distributions in train and test.
Sometimes, these kind of problems
could be solved by adjusting your
solution during the training procedure.
But sometimes, this problem can be solved
only by adjusting your solution
through the leaderboard.
That is through leaderboard probing.
The simplest way to solve this particular
situation in a competition is to try
to figure out the optimal constant
prediction for train and test data.
And shift your predictions
by the difference.
Right here we can calculate the average
height of women from the train data.
Calculating the average height
of men is a big trickier.
If the competition's metric
is means squared error,
we can send two constant submissions,
write down the simple formula.
And find out that the average target
value for the test is equal to 70 inches.
In general, this technique is
known as leaderboard probing.
And we will discuss it in the topic about.
So now we know the difference between the
average target values for the train and
the test data, which is equal to 7 inches.
And as the third step of adjusting
our submission to the leaderboard we
could just try to add
7 to all predictions.
But from this point it is not validational
it is a leaderboard probing and list.
Yes we probably could discover this
during exploratory data analysis and
try to make a correction
in our validation scheme.
But sometimes it is not possible
without leaderboard probing,
just like in this example.
A competition which has something similar
is the Quora question pairs competition.
There, distributions of the target
from train and test were different.
So one could get a good
improvement of a score
adjusting his predictions
to the leaderboard.
But fortunately, this case is rare enough.
More often, we encounter situations
which are more like the following case.
Consider that now train
consists not only of women, but
mostly of women, and test, vice versa.
Consists not only of men,
but mostly of men.
The main strategy to deal with
these kind of situations is simple.
Again, remember to mimic
the train test split.
If the test consists mostly of Men,
force the validation to
have the same distribution.
In that case, you ensure that
your validation will be fair.
This is true for getting raw scores and
optimal parameters correctly.
For example,
we could have quite different scores and
optimal parameters for women's and
men's parts of the data set.
Ensuring the same distribution in test and
validation helps us get scores and
parameters relevant to test.
I want to mention two
examples of this here.
First the Data Science Game Qualification
Phase: Music recommendation challenge.
And second, competition with
CTR prediction which we discussed
earlier in the data topic.
Let's start with the second one,
do you remember the problem,
we have a test of predicting CTR.
So, the train data, which basically
was the history of displayed ads
obviously didn't contain
ads which were not shown.
On the contrary, the test data
consisted of every possible ad.
Notice this is the exact case of different
distributions in train and test.
And again, we need to set up our
validation to mimic test here.
So we have this huge bias towards
showing that in the train and
to set up a correct validation.
We had to complete the validation
set with rows of not shown ads.
Now, let's go back to the first example.
In that competition,
participants had to predict
whether a user will listen to
a song recommended by assistant.
So, the test contained
only recommended songs.
But train, on the contrary,
contained both recommended songs and
songs users selected themselves.
So again, one could adjust his validation
by 50 renowned songs selected by users.
And again, if we will not account for
that fact, then improving our model
on actually selected songs can result
in the validation score going up.
But it doesn't have to result and
the same improvements for the leaderboard.
Okay let's conclude this overview
of handling validation problems for
the submission stage.
If you have too little data in public
leaderboard, just trust your validation.
If that's not the case,
make sure that you did not overfit.
Then check if you made
correct train/test split,
as we discussed in the previous video.
And finally, check if you have different
distributions in train and test.
Great, let's move on to
the next point of this video.
For now,
I hope you did everything all right.
First, you did extensive validation.
Second, you choose a correct splitter
strategy for train validation split.
And finally, you ensured the same
distributions in validation and testing.
But sometimes you have to expect
leaderboard shuffle anyway,
and not just for you, but for everyone.
First, for those who've never heard of it,
a leaderboard shuffle happens
when participants position some public and
private leaderboard drastically different.
Take a look at this screenshot from
the two sigma financial model in challenge
competition.
The green and
the red arrows mean how far a team moved.
For example, the participant who
finished the 3rd on the private
leaderboard was the 392nd
on the public leaderboard.
Let's discuss three main reasons for
that shuffle, randomness,
too little data, and different public,
private distributions.
So first, randomness,
this is the case when all participants
have very similar scores.
This can be either a very good score or
a very poor one.
But the main point here is
that the main reason for
differences in scores is randomness.
To understand this a bit more,
let's go through two quick examples here.
The first one is the Liberty Mutual Group,
Property Inspection Prediction
competition.
In that competition,
scores of competitors were very close.
And though randomness didn't play
a major role in that competition,
still many people overfit
on the public leaderboard.
The second example,
which is opposite to the first
is the TWO SIGMA Financial Model and
Challenge competition.
Because the financial data in that
competition was highly unpredictable,
randomness played a major role in it.
So one could say that the leaderboard
shuffle there was among
the biggest shuffles on KFold platform.
Okay, that was randomness, the second
reason to expect leaderboard shuffle
is too little data overall, and
in private test set especially.
An example of this is the Restaurant
Revenue Prediction Competition.
In that competition, trained set
consisted of less than 200 gross.
And this set consisted
of less than 400 gross.
So as you can see shuffle
here was more than expected.
Last reason of leaderboard
shuffle could be
different distributions between public and
private test sets.
This is usually the case
with time series prediction,
like the Rossmann Stores Sales
competition.
When we have a time based split,
we usually have first few weeks
in public leaderboard, and
next few weeks in private leaderboards.
As people tend to adjust their
submission to public leaderboard and
overfit, we can expect worse
results on private leaderboard.
Here again, trust your validation and
everything will be fine.
Okay, let's go over reasons for
leaderboard shuffling.
Now let's conclude both this video and
the entire validation topic.
Let's start with the video.
First, if you have big dispersion
of scores on validation stage
we should do extensive validation.
That means every score from
different KFold splits, and
team model on one split while
evaluating score on the other.
Second, if submission do not
match local validation score,
we should first, check if we have too
little data in public leaderboard.
Second, check if we did not overfit, check
if you chose correct splitting strategy.
And finally, check if trained test
have different distributions.
You can expect leaderboard shuffle
because of three key things, randomness,
little amount of data, and different
public/private test distributions.
So that's it,
in this topic we defined validation and
its connection to overfitting.
Described common validation strategies.
Demonstrated major data
splitting strategies.
And finally analyzed and learned how
to tackle main validation problems.
Remember this, and it will absolutely
help you out in competitions.
Make sure you understand
the main idea of validation well.
That is,
you need to mimic the trained test split.
[MUSIC]